>> So shamanism, from the
archaeological and other
evidence that we've
seen, appears to be--
at least in the
European continent--
at least 30,000 years old.
There's good evidence
from the caves in France,
like Chauvet Cave and other
caves, that indicate there's
a shamanic consciousness there.
On other continents,
it may be older,
for example, Australia,
among the Aboriginals.
And in Africa,
there's some evidence
from just sites,
archaeological sites, that
have some shamanic indicators.
And so it has been very, very
well-described by many experts
as the world's oldest
spiritual practice.
But shamanism-- so it's found
on every inhabited continent
and was used by the people
primarily as a healing
methodology.
And it was also used as
a divinatory practice,
in other words, to
contact these spirits
and ask for help in
seeking food sources
and other things that were
very important to the survival
of the peoples.
So it has those two major
elements, I think, to it.
Some people confuse
shamanism with a religion.
It's actually not a religion--
it is-- because it's not a
system of faith among shamans.
Shamanic people tend
to be of animistic.
They have-- in other words, they
believe that there are spirits.
Shamans don't believe
there are spirits.
They know there are spirits
because they interact with them
and work with them
all of the time.
So but animism,
the idea that there
are spirits that you need
to placate and/or interact
with, that is more a--
that is or can be a kind of
spiritual practice in religion.
But among shamans, it's
a very pragmatic practice
that has to do with the
survival of the people.
Michael Harner was
an anthropologist.
That was his training.
But he also had quite
a bit of background
in archaeology and ethnography.
And what he had a very
profound shamanic experience,
transformative experience,
among the people, the Conibo
people and the Shuar people in
Amazonia, Northwest Amazonia.
And through that experience,
which he wrote about in his
classic book, "The Way of
the Shaman," he discovered--
his major discovery was is
that there was another reality,
not so much--
that was the thing
that opened him up.
And, of course, his experience
was through an ayahuasca kind
of experience, which is what
the people he worked with
used at that time.
And he-- but after
that experience,
he came back to
the United States.
He has written papers and all
of that kind of thing, too.
But he came back to
the United States,
and he started
looking around for--
doing a lot of
research and actually
going to visit other
shamanic peoples.
And his mindset was is that it
had to be through an ayahuasca
kind of experience, you know,
that-- or some sort of a--
people call them entheogens
now but plant medicines,
psychotropics,
whatever your term is.
But he was thinking-- that
was his mindset that it
had to be that experience.
And what he discovered
in going around
to all these different shamanic
peoples is that more than 90%
of the world's shamanic
peoples actually
use rhythmic percussion
sound, drums, rattles.
That these aren't just for show.
That these are the things that
actually change the shaman's
consciousness so that the shaman
can at will and with discipline
access these sources of reality.
And so in his
various studies, he
distilled from the
cultural overlay
because every
culture, of course,
has its approach
to this powerful--
this-- it's a very
powerful system.
So people have
their own deities.
They have their own
spirits they work with.
Obviously, they're
working with a culture.
But what he distilled out
from his own knowledge
and his anthropological
studies, too,
is that there were very common
fundamental principles that
underlay all of these shamanic
practices that people had.
And that these methods,
methods, not cultural things,
but these methods could
be taught and returned to,
particularly Westerners,
now Easterners,
too, people who had lost
their shamanic traditions
centuries ago, in
Europe, for example,
during the Inquisition and
other things like that.
And so his primary
focus was that this
was a very powerful
system of being
able to access a profound
source of help, spirits,
and bring that help
back to a very--
a troubled world.
We have many, many
problems we need to solve.
And we don't have
to solve them alone.
So that's the general
background there.
The core principles
of shamanism--
I'll just mention
a few and then--
and one of the core
principles of shamanism
is a kind of cosmography
of the world.
And there are
actually three worlds.
There's an upper world, a lower
world, and a middle world.
And the important thing
about those worlds
is that the upper world
and the lower world
are entirely in what has been
called non-ordinary reality.
That's a term that
Carlos Castaneda used,
and it's useful, meaning, that
it's a non-consensual reality.
It's a different reality.
It has different principles
that operate in those realities.
And the middle world
actually is dual.
I mean, that's a common
term that's used now.
But it has an ordinary
reality aspect,
which is a consensual reality.
So we can sit here,
and we can see how-- we
can measure how much light is.
We can measure each
other's weight.
We could-- if we wanted
to, which we don't.
But we could do all of those
kinds of things, you know,
and we would come
out with an agreement
on that kind of thing.
But it also has a non-ordinary
reality aspect, which
is more of a spiritual reality.
And by spiritual, I
mean non-physical.
So in that reality, it's
inhabited by various--
we call them spirits--
beings.
And there are other
things that happen
in that non-ordinary reality
of the middle world, which
is why we have some of the--
from a shamanic perspective--
why there is spiritual
illness and other things.
But if you go-- the difference
with the upper world
and the lower world is
that they're entirely
in non-ordinary reality.
And so far as we have
been able to discover
and through hundreds
of thousands now
of students journeying
and visiting these places,
this is inhabited by
fully-evolved compassionate
beings.
Again, we call them spirits.
And so there is--
that is-- they have
power and wisdom that
is not readily available
here unless you know how
to access that other reality.
And so the methods that
are taught in shamanism,
that's what we teach.
We teach how-- we
teach a method.
How do you access
these other realities
and learn to
communicate and relate
to very specific
beings, spirits?
We call them either
teachers or power animals.
I mean, that's the general term.
And how do you
interact with them?
And then how do you bring
that wisdom here and sometimes
bring that power here, for
healing, for problem-solving?
Some people use it more in their
own lives for transformation.
Although shamanism actually
is not necessarily a system--
it's not a system
of enlightenment.
But what I found
is transformation
is the outcome of doing it.
You use it in
service for others,
and you are transformed.
So there are several other
principles of shamanism
I could tell you about.
But just the fundamental,
the first of all
is the idea of the worlds.
And that's why we
teach people how
to contact particularly the
spirits of the upper and lower
world.
And we teach them what
to be aware of in terms
of the middle world,
non-ordinary reality,
because the spirits there
are not fully evolved,
and they can be troublesome.
Just like there are good
people and bad people,
that some of the
spirits are not that--
some of them are not very
evolved, and they have agendas.
And the upper and lower
world spirits don't.
So, anyway, we teach people
how to contact those spirits.
But then when we teach
shamanic healing,
that has to do with how
do you work with things
in the middle world.
And I'll talk about
that in a moment.
But I wanted to say, so
there are the worlds.
And then one really fundamental
principle of shamanism
is that everything is
one and is alive and has
spirit, and everything,
even human-made things,
because everything is.
And so there-- just
there sometimes
in our advanced workshops,
we actually do a lot of work
with these different
aspects of reality where we
do a kind of merging with them.
We merge to actually sense--
to become that, to become it,
and to feel what it's like.
For example, one time I
did a very profound journey
to the spirit of my computer.
And it was one of
those things where
it's just-- it was very
amusing at one level
because I ended up going
out through the internet.
This was in the earlier
days of the internet.
And I had an experience of
the oneness of all things
through that simple--
what seemed to be simple process
of trying to understand that.
But I think that's a
principle of shamanism
that shamans don't believe
again that they end up
doing a lot of practices,
where they become.
We've all heard of a lot
of different cultural--
have different cultural
viewpoints of this--
but of people who
become one with an eagle
or become one with
whatever the animal is.
Or they become one with
a tree or whatever.
So in shamanic work,
what I've found
is that the foundation
that I worked
with before the Foundation for
Shamanic Studies was devoted
to the idea of all is one.
And we did a lot of
scientific study of it.
But the idea is is that--
so we offered education,
in this former foundation,
we offered educational programs
about oneness and about unity.
And there's certainly a
lot of scientific evidence
that you can use.
But the beautiful
thing about shamanism
is that it was all--
that in shamanism, you
can have the experience of
the oneness of all things.
You can know it
deeply in your being,
along with the scientific
evidence, which
is also important.
Shamanism is a very
holistic practice.
So wherever you can
find truth, whatever
ways that you find
truth is good.
Shamanism is not the only way.
It's also a holistic practice
in terms of shamanic healing
so meaning that there are
some things that medical--
that medical practices
do very well,
and sometimes we need that.
And so you encourage
people to do that.
Other times, for--
I'm a little distracted here--
>> I know.
I'm sorry.
>> That's all right.
Let's just make sure it's gone.
So-- but so shamans and the
rest and other kinds of healers
work very well
together, you know.
So we practice those kinds of
holistic practices together.
So there's the
oneness of all things.
There's the three worlds,
the idea of the three worlds.
And then the understanding
that shamanism
is an independent spirituality.
One-- our focus
is teaching people
to go directly to the source
of information and wisdom,
so there is no intermediary.
And that's why I said,
it's not a system.
It's not a system of faith.
But the idea of shamanic
practices is that,
through learning these
fairly simple methodologies--
although you have
to practice them--
you can access these very
powerful and wise spirits
or beings and learn how to
bring back that wisdom here
to help others.
And then, of course,
at first, we--
I think all of us, when
we start journeying,
we spend a lot of
time talking to--
communicating with these various
spirits in these realities
to learn for ourselves, to
say, OK, what am I doing here,
you know, and to get
personal help and advice.
And I think that one of the
major principles of shamanism
is that you can--
once you connect
with this dimension,
you yourself become a
more compassionate person
because these are
very fully-evolved
compassionate beings.
You become a more
compassionate person,
or you strive to become a
more compassionate person.
And also you realize--
Michael used to say
that "we are not alone."
In fact, he wrote an article
at one point talking about,
"we are not alone."
But in my personal experiences,
what I've discovered--
and what I've discovered through
a lot of students who I worked
with--
is that we discover
that I am not alone,
that there is help
available to me,
very wise compassionate help.
No matter how bad things
get, you do not have
to be alone in it, you know.
And you can rely--
and these spirits
are, like I said,
they're fully compassionate.
But they also do
not have an agenda.
Their agenda, if
there is any agenda,
is to alleviate pain
and suffering here.
And so you can rely on them and
trust them and what they say
and what they do.
So I think that that's one
of the major transformative
possibilities that
shamanism offers.
Well, in working with the
Harners over many years
and also teaching
students, when you follow
particular students-- and
in my own life, of course--
you follow people
through this process,
you see an ever deepening
sense of compassion.
There is also-- that, I think,
is one of the main things
that it can do for people.
You also, though,
notice that it--
practicing this and
being whole in your soul
and having this
connection in this
gives you a kind of what
we call spiritual power.
Power is a difficult term
sometimes for some people
because we've all
experienced abuse of power.
But shamanism, when
you are working
with these
compassionate spirits,
you start to understand a
little bit more, not only about
how the world actually
works, but you start
to have a much clearer sense
of your own work in the world
and what you want to do
and how you want to help
and what changes
you want to make.
And even with very,
very large problems,
you can get wisdom to help
you solve those problems.
You also can very
directly go to the spirits
and try to examine your own
blocks in your own life.
What is keeping you from being
fully who you came here to be,
fully yourself, fully evolved?
And you can work on those
with the help of the spirits.
I've seen a transformation in
people doing that kind of work
for themselves.
But even more profound
is when people
are drawn to do some kind of
shamanic healing for others.
Because it's in being
service to others,
that amazing changes
can take place.
And so I would say
that, although I've
seen all kinds of changes or
deep changes, profound changes
in students taking the
work, a lot of those changes
have come from
learning the method
and then using it in
the world, not only
for yourself to transform
but also to offer healing
to others, to solve
problems, to maintain
your own personal
power so that you can
be very effective in the world.
It has a lot to do with
being very, very effective.
You get-- you gain this
kind of spiritual power,
meaning your soul is fully
present in your body.
And so what you do
has more effect.
It has a larger effect.
And so there are so many
ways that that plays out.
And then, of course,
the people who
are the recipients of
this, these healings,
have their lives
changed in big ways
because they no longer are
suffering from whatever
the issue it is that they have.
And then more and
more of us now,
since there are more
of us, are actually
using shamanic work to try
to help in world situations.
And I mean to try to come
up with pragmatic, practical
solutions.
That's what we call the
divinatory component,
asking the spirits
for, OK, what's
some way I can help
in this situation
and then playing it out
and seeing how it works.
So it's not-- it's not
about what we might call--
it's not about using
shamanism in a ceremonial way
or asking the spirits
to come do it.
We actually find ways
of enacting it as humans
and evolving at the same time.
So I think that's one
of the major things I
see in terms of working into
the future for shamanic work.
From a shamanic
perspective, soul retrieval
has to do with returning
a person's personal power
to them.
From a shamanic
perspective, we humans
also have a spirit,
a personal spirit,
which we have called
the soul, along
with all of the other things
that are living and not
living that have spirit
and soul at some level.
But from a shamanic perspective,
through just living life
sometimes in this world,
you can be knocked around
by life a bit.
You can undergo certain
kinds of traumas.
We all know that this
is a difficult reality.
And in doing that, part of
your essence or your vital life
force can dissipate.
If your soul is fully gone
from your body, then you die.
That's-- your soul
passes somewhere else,
which shamanism also does
talk about sometimes.
Your soul goes someplace else.
And when your body is
gone, you no longer
have that anchor
in this reality.
But you can walk around
quite diminished,
which is a source of--
it can be a source of
vulnerability to illnesses.
And it also makes your
life very difficult.
Things that might have been easy
for you before suddenly become
very difficult.
Challenging situations
may cause you to get
even worse, you know.
So in shamanism, the shaman
can, through a methodology
that we teach in our
courses, contact--
find-- look for and find this
lost essence of your soul
and return it to your body.
There's a very specific
practice for doing that.
And once that soul essence
is restored to you,
then you have what
you might call--
I like to think of it somehow
as a spiritual immune system.
So that life still is
going to throw challenges
at you because that's the
nature of this reality.
But you have a kind
of resilience to them.
You have the ability
to say, OK, even
really, really difficult
things become things
that you can use--
or not that you can use-- but
things that you can address
in some fashion
because you have this--
you have this spiritual
immune system.
So soul retrieval is a very
important spiritual practice
because it allows you
to be fully present here
but also in your full power.
And it doesn't make
your problems go away,
but it makes them solvable.
It makes them-- and
the people I know
who've done this,
who have really
gotten to the point
where their soul is
pretty solid in their bodies.
And when you do this work, the
spirits work with you a lot.
And so sometimes they leave
and spontaneously return.
So we call them soul
portions to you.
There's a simple example
that I sort of like to use.
And I'm not too
sure how apt it is.
But it seems to speak to people.
And that is, if you
think of yourself
as coming into this world as
like a 100-watt light bulb,
you're very bright and
shiny, and all of this.
And through working
with life, you
get knocked around
so maybe you're
walking around as 20 watts.
So a trained shaman can
bring back that lost--
find and bring back
that lost essence to you
and return it to you so that
then you are then fully able
then to work through life.
So it's an amazing practice.
In many ways, it's-- in many
ways, it's quite simple.
The methodology is simple.
But as with all
shamanic practice,
the methodologies
tend to be simple.
But what makes the difference
is that a shaman with experience
and who has very, very strong
relationships with the helping
spirits.
Because the helping spirits--
these advanced spirits of the
upper and the lower worlds--
they are the ones
who do the work.
They are the ones
But they-- but we're very
important to the process.
We work in partnership
with them because they
have a limited ability
to pass into this reality
unless one of us
invites them and knows
how to bring that power here.
We're in a reality where you're
thinking up or down, you know.
One of the most
important principles
that I think, if the reason
Michael went into this,
is that he was
just-- from his first
and his early experiences--
he was just awed by the fact
that there was another reality.
There was that-- we
think this is real.
And now and then,
we have experiences
that we can't
explain, et cetera.
And that there was
another reality that
was totally different
from this reality, that
had its own integrity,
own rules, own guidelines,
and things like that.
And that if you could
access that reality,
you could make this
reality better, you know.
So he was just-- he was
very struck by that.
And so in terms of
evolving of us or using--
and I can only speak to
shamanic methods really--
to transform, then you do need
to have knowledge that people--
if you-- you cannot go
through this reality--
you can go through this
reality naively open.
But you will invite to
yourself difficulties.
It's like you're
swimming in an ocean
where there are a
lot of things that
can come your way without
any kind of knowledge
or protection.
And so in studying
shamanic methods,
you learn how to access
these sources of protection.
That's why when we first
start with our work
when we're teaching it, we
connect people with the--
what you call-- what
we've talked about--
is the up or the down
because those spirits
are fully compassionate.
And once you have this
connection with them,
it's sort of like having
a rechargeable battery.
You can plug into
that, and you have then
this source of power
and wisdom that
allows you to have
protection in this--
as you move through
this environment, which
has this dual nature.
And you are then able to
not only have protection,
but you are able to more
successfully expand.
One of the amazing principles
to me about shamanism is that--
and the way we teach it, too--
if you have an experience
with plant medicines,
you might be cracked open, you
know, and be able to see that.
But Michael is-- his opinion
about that, having done both,
is that--
and I think this is true
for me, too-- is that once
you are open, then you also need
a methodology and a discipline
to be able to work this.
It's not-- you--
some people, I
think, think, well,
I take some sort
of a drug, a plant.
This is true in medicine, too.
And then, suddenly,
all my problems
are through or finished.
That is only the beginning.
And so then you need
to find some way that's
workable for you to
be able to do this.
And in my case, for example,
shamanism was a wonderful way
of being able to
have a discipline,
to be able to use it to work
with others, and then the way--
and then you get to the
point where you feel,
I'm a totally different person
than I was when I started,
you know,
particularly, I think--
I think I was always a little
bit sensitive to the world.
The world needs help,
and I wanted to help.
But I had not--
I didn't really know how
to do that or effectively
in some senses how to-- how do
you-- how do I transform myself
and what would that
transformed self look like?
What would it-- how
would I function?
And so one of the
beautiful things I really
like about shamanism
is that I've
started to look at my helping
spirits as my role models.
So they're-- from our--
they're fully evolved.
They're compassionate.
They don't have agendas.
They're not going to be--
they're kind.
They'll poke you
when you need it
but, you know, it's not like
they're all lovey-dovey and all
that kind of stuff, you know.
It's not-- this is not an
airy fairy kind of thing.
It's very solid,
very grounded work.
But most shamans I know are
extremely pragmatic people.
But you have to be
fully grounded here
in order to let yourself loose
to travel in those realms.
So I think it's a beautiful
work to be involved in.
And you have so many wonderful
experiences, those touching,
loving experiences in small--
in large ways and small ways.
I saved the life of a squirrel
one time, going through a lot.
And I learned a lot from--
I went through a whole process
with-- it's a long story.
And then a few
days after that, I
was at a workshop,
a shamanic workshop,
in a wild-- kind
of a wild place.
And I was walking down the path.
And I thought, what's--
and I heard, like, footsteps.
And I looked back, and there
was a squirrel following me.
And it came up, and it
patted me on the foot.
It was another squirrel,
but I personally
think, OK, somehow these are the
mysterious little things that
happen.
That squirrel knew that I
was a friend to squirrels.
You know, it wasn't
looking for food.
It just patted me on the
foot, and then it went away.
And I thought, this
is strange, you know.
But you have enough of
those kinds of experiences.
And you realize that
how interconnected--
that everything is one.
And that there is a
spiritual dimension that
is working hard, just
as we're working hard,
to connect with us and
wants us to succeed.
That's how I think
of the spirits.
So it's a--
I'm just-- I'm always touched
by the ways, large and small,
that this dimension
works with us.